---
layout: post
title: "UT61E Bluetooth: HM-11 Receiving and Decoding on Linux"
categories: linux multimeter
---
The HM-11 Module implements a Bluetooth 4.0 (BLE) notification characteristic, this means after subscription to this characteristic the other side will automatically receive the data packet without explicitly asking. In the case of the UT61E this happens every 0.5s (2Hz sample rate).

**Important note (2019): This post is outdated, i built a better solution in the meantime: [BLE Serial]({% post_url 2019-12-18-ble-serial %})**

Utilizing the the BlueZ bluetooth stack on Linux and the included gatttool, it is possible to set up the connection/subscription in an interactive terminal session. I am not going to show here how this works though, since doing it programatically makes more sense. 
The [pygatt](https://github.com/peplin/pygatt) module does exactly this, makes the gatttool interface usable in python scripts. 
I had to modify it a bit to get the data out, also i have written a script that opens the device and prints the raw data as ASCII to stdout. To use it clone or download [my repo](https://github.com/Jakeler/ut61e-pygatt), make sure you have installed the `pexpect` python2 module and then execute `bt4-reader.py` with python2. It will be very likely that it will not connect, because the MAC is not matching (line 30):
```python
device = adapter.connect('20:91:48:4C:4C:54')
```
It is necessary to change this to your module address, to get the addresses of devices in reach use `hcitool lescan`.
In addition the script assumes that `hci0` is the bluetooth adapter and the UUID is from the HM-11 module, on all other setups this must be adopted.

Now if everything works it should output something like that (example from the voltage range):
```
000002;000:0
000002;000:0
000001;000:0
000001;000:0
000002;000:0
```
This are the raw 12 byte long packets.

To decode this there comes another nice project into play, the [ut61e (Python)](https://github.com/pklaus/ut61e_python) package from Philipp Klaus. It can be simply installed with `pip install ut61e`.
Now just pipe the output into the `es51922` script to get the interpreted output:
```
./bt4-reader | es51922
```
```
00:03:52.215904 0.0002 V
00:03:52.695507 0.0002 V
00:03:53.215803 0.0001 V
00:03:53.695640 0.0001 V
00:03:54.215732 0.0002 V
```
Also the output will be saved into a csv file in the current directory and can be easily imported into other applications.

Another option is create virtual serial ports with `socat` and write the data there, i have a few lines in `bt4-reader.py` to do this, comment in the lines cointaining `ser`. Then for example [dmmut61e](https://github.com/stv0g/dmm_ut61e) can be used to save/process the data.
